Getting the right process makes an
enormous difference because it reassures
clients and it reduces their feeling or
need to micromanage.
Because when a client starts micromanaging
is almost always a sign that
they're feeling uncomfortable,
they're feeling out of control or
that the process is out
of control in some way.
And so they feel this need to step in and
fill that gap.
So, essentially we need to help reduce
that kind of desire to micromanage and
a robust process really helps with that.
And actually, that is true whether
you're talking about design project or
a technical project to be quite honest.
If a client understands a technical
project from beginning to end and
what will happen in the order things
will happen then, then they feel much
more reassured again than it disappearing
into the black box of techie magic.
When they hear nothing,
they see nothing for months and
then poop outcomes a functional
website at the end of it.
That intervening time can be very scary
if you don't understand what's going on.
So, having a process helps
reduce the micromanage,
it also manages clients expectations
much better educate some, and
it will also help eliminate your scope
creep and your endless iterations,
or more specifically it
will manage those things.
I'm not saying there won't
be iterations of design,
but there'll be iterations for the right
reasons and not the wrong reasons, and
it won't be endless and with scope creep,
people can still suggest things but
it will be managed how we
integrate them into the project.
So let's look at what your current
process probably is, and see where
potentially is creating some problems and
how we can go about fixing that.
All right, so,
I'm gonna make some guesses about what
your current process is,
when it comes to design.
And let me, you might be right,
I might be wrong and
be interesting in the chat let
me know if I'm wrong in this.
I suspect your project normally begins
with some form of kickoff meeting, right?
Totally fine,
should have a kickoff meeting,
that's exactly where you should take
things, totally agree with that.
Then you probably move into doing
some initial design concepts.
Now I'm beginning to have
problems already, but
we'll come back to that in a minute.
So, you're producing some kind of mock up.
Now, normally that's often
a high fidelity mock up,
you've done in something like figma,
all looks very pretty,
then you present that back to
the client in some kind of way, right?
And you do this big moment where
you show them the dark times.
I think of this the mad men moment, right?
It's a kinda hangover from the advertising
industry of the 1950s, where they would go
away and they would smoke cigarettes and
be inappropriate with women.
And then produce some kind
of mazing presentation and
they'd go into the client and
the client would question it slightly and
they would go, well,
we don't wanna work with you get out.
It's that kind of error of things
as you can tell I'm not a fan.
[LAUGH] so you kinda go from this
secret thing of producing a concept to
presenting it, and then the client
inevitably has problems with it.
So you end up going through these multiple
rounds of iterations and you've really
no idea how long it's gonna take you
to shut the client up at this point.
How many times am I going to
have to revisit this design and
change it before the client says,
yeah, all right go on then.
And then once they do finally give you the
okay, then you have to do all the other
design templates cuz probably the last
however many iterations has just been
arguing about the homepage,
let alone everything else, right?
So then you get into doing
the different design templates.
Normally at this point,
most people have lost the will to live, so
the amount of arguments goes down
dramatically with the other templates but
nonetheless, they all need to be designed.
And then it gets handed
across to the developer or
you end up having to build it your site or
yourself.
If you have to build it yourself, then
you have to stare at design by this stage
you hate for
months at a time while you build it.
If someone else has got to build it,
you're handing across the design to
a developer that's probably never seen
the design and goes, I can't build this,
is not practical.
And then right at the end of all of that,
the content is added in, right?
Just kind of poured into this empty
template, at which point half of it
breaks because the titles are too long and
the text is too long.
I'm exaggerating for comic effect,
but you get the idea.
That is what our process
often can feel like.
And maybe you're sitting there feeling
smug and going that you don't do all of
those things and if not,
then well done, good on you, but
you probably do some of them or
at least can associate with some of them.
So let's briefly look at the problem
with your current process and
why it becomes so problematic.
First of all, you're forced to
design without content, right?
This is just madness, okay?
Design is the relationship
between content and visuals.
That is in a nutshell,
those two have to go hand in hand.
And the idea that you add
the content very last when what
is a website fundamentally
about its content, right?
If you go back to what the web really is,
it's a document management system, or
at least that's what it was
intended to be at the beginning,
is about conveying information.
The design and
the functionality have all come later.
So communicating
the content is fundamental.
If you don't have the content and
you design without that content,
it's gonna to create all kinds of
problems for you later down the line.
Secondly, the design is gonna
come as a surprise, right?
And that is a big thing.
If I come into a meeting with you now and
I was meeting with all you guys and
you were stakeholders in a project,
we were gonna redesign the front
end masters website, right?
So I'd gone away and
I produce this amazing design concept
that I've worked on for weeks.
And I came to present it to you.
Every single one of you will have
a vague mental picture in your head
of what a redesigned front end masters
website could look like, right?
There'll be things on that website
that annoy you, obviously not many,
I'm sure it's perfect.
But, there will be the occasional
thing on the website that annoys you.
There'll be things that you'd like to see
on the website that I'm currently there.
You might have your personal
preferences about design, etc.
And, I'll go Tada, and I'll show
you my new design, and you'll go,
well that wasn't what I had in my head.
See the fundamental problem,
is actually a moment where understanding
human psychology is incredibly important.
Because that moment you present
the design will be a shock and
we don't like surprises except a Christmas
and even then let's be honest,
we don't like the surprise if it's socks,
right?
So, really this idea of having this big
reveal moment is fundamentally flawed.
So, also then what happens, right?
You present the design, and
what's the next words out of your mouth,
what do you think?
Never ask a client what they think or
a stakeholder,
because then no educated to know, they
can't provide quality feedback because
they've not been involved
with the process at all.
They understand very little
of design principles.
They very understand very little of your
design thinking and so if you ask them,
what do you think?
And which means that they have to express
an opinion, what are they gonna do?
What do you think, they're gonna fall
back on their personal opinions?
It's the only thing that
they can realistically do.
And do we actually care about
their personal opinions?
No, we don't.
We care about the end
user's personal opinion.
So during a big presentation with a what
do you think afterwards, kiss of death.
The other problem with that process
is when it gets to the iterations.
Now I'm not saying we're gonna wipe
out iterations because your design,
I'm sorry to break it to you, probably
won't be perfect the first time, right?
I've just done a design for
a pet insurance company.
It went out to usability testing, and
it performed worse than
the design they already had.
That's a humbling moment after 27 years of
designing that you can't do better than
what they already had.
So, but that's the design process,
that happens sometimes.
So I'm gonna have to iterate the design.
But here's the thing,
I'm iterating based on hard data, right?
I'm iterating based on user
feedback which is predictable.
I knew that the design was gonna be tested
and I knew that my design wasn't gonna be
perfect and
I would have to make adjustments.
That was predictable, I could cost
that in, in my both my time and
what I charge the client, right?
Now, but with traditional with endless
iteration where it's the clients opinions,
you don't know whether they're
gonna go yes the first time or
whether it's gonna take you 20
iterations to get to the sign off.
Now if you're a freelancer or an agency,
that is the kiss of death
to your profitability,
because you've no idea how many
iterations you might have to do, right?
If you work in house is
still a fundamental problem,
because that draws out the whole timeline.
And what gets squeezed development, right?
And that's why you have so many angry
developers, because they never left with
enough time because the design
gets stuck in iteration hell.
And then the other thing with doing
it in this way is that the final
site often looks very different
from the design, right?
And then the client complains that the
final site doesn't look like the design
they signed off.
And the reason it doesn't look like the
design they signed off is because nobody
consulted the developer during
the design process, right?
And nobody put any real content into it.
And then finally,
running a project in this way includes
a whole load of risks associated with it,
right.
So risks around how long it's gonna take,
how many iterations are going to be,
how alienated a client is going to be and
frustrated by the design,
how demoralized the design is going to be?
How long it's gonna, whether users even
accept it at the end of it because you're
not doing any kind of testing.
There are all kinds of risks with
this kind of approach and so
we need to correct it.